Digital Voting Transformation
NUS Chief Technology Officer Course
March 2024

This presentation has been prepared by Jered Masters for submission to the Chief Technology Officer program, June 2023 batch.

The company discussed herein is based upon a client I have worked with in the past, but the name and some details have been changed.



Section I
Project Proposal / Problem Statement

1.     Identify a suitable organisation for the project (could be real or hypothetical).​
 
2.     ​Conduct a preliminary analysis of the organisation's current state, key challenges, and consumer pain points (if any). Examples: Outdated legacy systems, lack of data-driven insights, limited online presence, etc. ​
 
3.     ​Ascertain the problem statement(s) regarding the Digital Transformation Strategy (Write down specific problems that must be resolved to enhance technology and digital tool usage).


Business
Mid size business, 270 employees
Runs small to mid size votes for schools, universities, and home owner clubs.
Elections are administered using paper ballots after the candidates are chosen.
Votes are then counted manually under supervision.
Voting Systems Inc

Key Challenge: Trust
Verifiable
Each voter need to know that their individual vote is remembered and stored in the system and has not been changed.
Inspectable
Scalable
The system needs to be able to aggregate the votes
Computable
Many different voting styles need to be accounted for, first-past-the-post, preference.
Anonymity 
All voters need to be able to be able to hide their identity and their vote from the public.

Technology / Process
1. Contract and Planning
Customers reach out and engage the company
Projections about the size and complexity of the voting process must be made to properly estimate the cost of the managing the vote.
Plans are drawn up, permits are requested
2. Enrollment
Candidates/topics must be registered to be on the ballot.
Voters must enroll to be eligible to vote on the day.
Support staff must be available to handle enrollment difficulties.

3. Setup
Rosters for staffing are prepared. Admin work is required for scheduling, salaries, ordering materials.
Ballots are printed, checked and counted.
Polling stations are setup and placed.


3. Execution
Voters must physically travel to the polling locations, and often must remain in a queue to wait for their turn.
All voting is supervised and checked.


3. Counting 
Ballot boxes are moved 
Votes must be manually counted under strict supervision by a group of representatives, intended to create an impartial consensus.



Problems
1. Contract and Planning
Difficult and cumbersome for the client to properly estimate the size of the vote.
2. Enrollment
Slow and cumbersome to be enrolled.

3. Setup
Requires a lot of admin work and fabrication of single use materials.


3. Execution
Causes a lot of wasted time and uncomfortable situations
Voters are less likely to attend due to frictions


3. Counting 
Counting is slow, and despite honest intentions, mistakes still happen
Difficult for voters to truly trust the process



Problem Statement 
The process for creating a poll or election is too cumbersome that it restricts the frequency with with polls are held, resulting in a low resolution democracy.
The friction on voters to attend and cast their vote discourages engagement, resulting in a less representative democracy.
Despite the thoroughness of the people, mistakes still happen and trust can be low.

Project Proposal
Implement a blockchain based voting system that leverages ZK-SNARK algorithms to securely and anonymously collect votes, then aggregate them in a provable, inspectable way.

Section II
Digital Business Strategy

DBS
1.     Conduct a focused analysis of the organisation's environment, industry, market positioning, changing consumer preferences, and digital trends that could impact business.​
 
2.     Assess the organisation's digital readiness (current technological capabilities, digital infrastructure, and how it manages consumer data). Check how well it integrates with digital platforms. Identify areas that need improvement for a successful digital transformation.​
 
3.     Identify potential opportunities and untapped markets for your company. Specify the area and its details. Explain how you can provide value and the reasons behind your choice.​


Industry
DRE
Paper ballot
Lever Machines
Automation and digitisation increasing over time

The general public wants convenience, now more than ever before. Most people have become accustomed to ease and convenience.

Trust in voting and democracies is at an all time low. Introducing an element of opacity will only fuel these issues. Any solution must be above reproach.

The Public: Conflicting Trends
Public Attitude
Customer Preferences
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2023/09/19/public-trust-in-government-1958-2023/

https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=fa081b594a937339c2f054ccf488e8dfb60af7cc

https://www.smartinsights.com/ecommerce/customer-experience-examples/convenience-is-driving-e-commerce-growth-and-influencing-consumer-decisions/

Current Technological Ability
Digital infrastructure
Technology Teams
Data Management

Opportunities 
Government
Move Towards More Referendums
Small Communities
Governments already well established voting systems, however if a trustworthy and well built solution became available, it would be very interesting to many governments.

As the cost of running one of these elections decreased significantly and the effort spent on dealing with each client can be cut to nearly zero, a large number of smaller client's would suddenly come into scope for the business.
Similarly, as the effort required from the constituent public is dramatically decreased, the number of issue that individuals would be willing to vote on would increase.
Large Companies
The reduced cost of running multiple polls at the same time opens the door to running AGM resolutions through e-voting platforms.

Section III
Digital Transformation Strategy

DTS
1.     Examine the Digital Business Strategy (DBS). Find out how digital technologies create new value or enhance productivity. Describe how these changes affect consumers, operations, processes, and people.​
 
2.     Define strategic goals for digital transformation (include objectives inside and outside the company).​
 
3.     Make a clear plan. List important actions and rank them by impact and feasibility. Think about budget, tech use, and change in the organisation. Also, think about collaboration and scaling using a buy-build-borrow strategy.​


III.1 New Digital Technologies
A new mobile app for the business will allow users to be access the voting services more conveniently from the comfort of their own homes.
a) New Mobile App
With a new organised database, the company can gain better insights into how different demographics learn and respond to marketing. 
b) Organised Database
Operationally, the process of setting up a vote and delivering the outcome becomes significantly cheaper and faster when it can be done without physical polling booths and stationing staff onsite.
c) Digital Platform
Bringing in a cryptographic algorithm for anonymous, provable aggregation of users data will help to resolve the trust problem in the e-voting industry.
d) ZK-SNARK

III.1.a New Mobile App
Faster and more convenient
Increase voting participation by allowing people to vote from home, from work or on commute.

Flexibility
Allow people to change their vote at any time before the polling closes
Case studies show that swing voters are more likely to place a vote if they know they can change it later, resulting in a high number of voters having placed votes before polling closes.

Accountability and trust
The cryptographic tools for preparing and submitting their vote and later verifying the vote in the blockchain can be built right into the app for ease and convenience.
The source code for the app can be published to the internet so that tech savvy users can validate the verification is being done correctly.

III.1.b Organised Database
Fast registration of new polls
The current process of registering new polls is mostly paper based, then information is manually copied into spreadsheets. Slow and efficient.
Using an organised database with a high quality user interface, client's can easily register new polls, using previous polls as template for the next one.

Insights
By having users answer some questions at the start of the poll, users can categorised into demographics. 
These demographics can be attached to their vote, without attaching any identity information.
This can then be used to generate insights into voting behaviour and demographics.

III.1.c Digital Platform
Business Agility
Since there is no need for a physical polling station for most votes, the overhead per vote for the business is extremely low.
The business can generally be much more agile, being able to quickly respond to new market opportunities. This is essential for the business to survive the digital revolution and scale.

III.1.d ZK-SNARK
Highly innovative algorithm that unlocks huge potential.
Can be used to securely achieve the essential components of a good voting system
Any voter can check their vote has been counted, and is still stored in the database
Any voter can check their vote has not been changed
All voter information is kept anonymous from other voters
Any observer can check that the resulting numbers are a true and accurate sum of votes without knowing the source votes

This very intelligent algorithm is already in use in the crypto industry to prove that a custody provider (an exchange for example) does still hold all of the assets that users have deposited while preserving the privacy of all users.

Strategic Goals
Build out Digital Platform
Educate Public about Cryptographic Technologies
Retrain Existing Staff

Plan
Action
Description
Priority
Client research
Reach out to existing client and gather feedback on the proposal. Reach out to prospective clients
Plan out the project
Scope out different phases and prepare a budget for each
Prepare technical specification
Database design, system architecture, data analytics processes
Hire team
Software developers, database designers
Begin development
Setup agile development teams. Supervise sprint planning meetings
Prepare re-training materials
Train existing operations team in how to use new

Technology - Platform
Function
Candidates
Database
For the core platform we can use a common relational database such as Postgres or Microsoft SQL. These options provide enough flexibility and functionality that the business will likely not need to make any major upgrades during its lifespan or be limited by the database technology.
Core API
The performance requirements for this service are quite low. Client's and end users will likely tolerate very slow server speeds, so the dev team doesn’t need to commit to an extremely high performance programming language or server technology.
The major concern is scalability, so we need to be careful to select a programming language and platform that can handle multi threading on the incoming requests handling.
Cloud hosting
Cloud hosting is quite common place and selecting a hosting provider is quite straight forward. AWS, GCP, Azure are all viable candidates.
User Interface
The user interface will require three different components:
Desktop web interface for the the companies/clients to register their poll and review the results. This is best developed use one of the popular frontend frameworks such as ReactJS, Angular or Vue
Mobile app and website for the voters to cast their vote. While most companies would prefer that users can vote from both web and mobile app, it is critical that we only enable the mobile app to ensure the security of the cryptographic tools.
Web interface (mobile and desktop) for public users to review the results of a poll, and explore the blockchain to verify the security of the vote.

Technology - Cryptography
Function
Candidates
Cryptographic Technology
The algorithms that make the voting process secure, anonymous and verifiable are not at all trivial to develop. This is a novel use of SK-SNARK technology, as such there are no off-the-shelf products available for use. 
Proven (Raposa) is a very clever startup in the EU who have developed very similar technology for a similar purpose. I believe the would be an ideal partner in this venture.
Blockchain hosting
Project Management
Learning tools

Team
Action
Description
Priority
Client research
Reach out to existing client and gather feedback on the proposal. Reach out to prospective clients
Plan out the project
Scope out different phases and prepare a budget for each
Prepare technicial specification
Database design, system architecture, data analytics processes
Hire team
Software developers, database designers
Begin development
Setup agile development teams. Supervise sprint planning meetings
Prepare retraining materials
Train operations team in how to use new

Budget
Action
Description
Priority
Client research
Reach out to existing client and gather feedback on the proposal. Reach out to prospective clients
Plan out the project
Scope out different phases and prepare a budget for each
Prepare technicial specification
Database design, system architecture, data analytics processes
Hire team
Software developers, database designers
Begin development
Setup agile development teams. Supervise sprint planning meetings
Prepare retraining materials
Train operations team in how to use new

Section IV
Additional Issues and Technologies

Additional
1.     Identify issues related to Portfolio Management, Enterprise Architecture, Cloud Strategy, Cybersecurity, and Data Analytics that might impact DBS and DTS.​
 
2.     Think about challenges and benefits of collaboration and scaling in the context of DBS and DTS. Jot down your insights about how collaboration and scaling could affect the success of these strategies.​
 
3.     Note down specific examples of how emerging technologies can be relevant and useful in shaping your DBS and DTS.​



Cyber Security
Cyber security would be a major concern for a voting system. Fortunately in this case, there is no risk of an attacker changing a vote or submitting fraudulent votes into the system. However one concerning area is that an attacker might find a way to see which way the voters are voting.

While the area of concern is different compared to most e-Voting systems, it is still a serious concern as well functioning democratic system can only exist where votes are anonymous.




Emerging Technologies
Sustainable Computing
AI / Machine Learning

Sustainable Computing
https://www.weforum.org/publications/top-10-emerging-technologies-of-2023/

AI / Machine Learning
https://www.simplilearn.com/top-technology-trends-and-jobs-article
